配置

参考文献：

* https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/configuration/?view=aspnetcore-2.2
* https://www.paraesthesia.com/archive/2018/06/20/microsoft-extensions-configuration-deep-dive/

## Conventions

At app startup, configuration sources are read in the order that their configuration providers are specified.

Configuration keys adopt the following conventions:

- Keys are case-insensitive. 
- If a value for the same key is set by the same or different configuration providers, the last value set on the key is the value used.
- Hierarchical keys
  - Within the Configuration API, a colon separator (`:`) works on all platforms.
- The `ConfigurationBinder` supports binding arrays to objects using array indices in configuration keys. 

Configuration values adopt the following conventions:

- Values are strings.
- Null values can't be stored in configuration or bound to objects.

### GetSection

`IConfiguration.GetSection` extracts a configuration subsection with the specified subsection key. 

To return an `IConfigurationSection` containing only the key-value pairs in `section1`, call `GetSection` and supply the section name:

```fsharp
let configSection = _config.GetSection("section1")
```

The `configSection` doesn't have a value, only a key and a path.

Similarly, to obtain the values for keys in `section2:subsection0`, call `GetSection` and supply the section path:

```csharp
let configSection = _config.GetSection("section2:subsection0")
```

`GetSection` never returns `null`. If a matching section isn't found, an empty `IConfigurationSection` is returned.

When `GetSection` returns a matching section, `Value` isn't populated. A `Key` are returned when the section exists.

### GetChildren

A call to `IConfiguration.GetChildren` on `section2` obtains an `IEnumerable<IConfigurationSection>` that includes:

- `subsection0`
- `subsection1`

```fsharp
let configSection = _config.GetSection("section2")
let children = configSection.GetChildren()
```

### Exists

Use `ConfigurationExtensions.Exists` to determine if a configuration section exists:

```fsharp
let sectionExists = _config.GetSection("section2:subsection2").Exists()
```

Given the example data, `sectionExists` is `false` because there isn't a `section2:subsection2` section in the configuration data.

# Everything is Key/Value

The most important thing to know about the new configuration system is that **everything boils down to key/value pairs**. You may have a pseudo-hierarchy of these key/value pairs so you can walk it like a tree, but in the end it's still key/value pairs, like a dictionary. No matter the input format, it all gets normalized.

- Keys are case-insensitive.
- Values are strings.
- The hierarchy delimiter is `:` when querying parsed configuration.
- Every configuration provider flattens their structure down to the same normalized format.

Let's look at some samples and see how they flatten out.

Here's a JSON file with some configuration:

```json
{
  "logging": {
    "enabled": true,
    "level": "Debug"
  },
  "components": {
    "database": {
      "connection": "connection-string"
    },
    "files": {
      "path": "/etc/path"
    }
  }
}
```

When this flattens out, you get:

```ml
components:database:connection = "connection-string"
components:files:path = "/etc/path"
logging:enabled = "True"
logging:level = "Debug"
```

I have sorted the configuration keys for easier reading. As you can see, it's all strings. The Boolean `true` has been converted to its string representation `True`.



# Ordinal Collections (Arrays)

Ordinal collections (think arrays) are a sort of interesting special case in configuration. It's pretty easy to think about it when using JSON like this:

```
{
    "components": [{
        "database": {
            "enabled": true
        }
    }, {
        "files": {
            "enabled": false
        }
    }]
}
```

It's an array of two objects. But how does that *flatten out into key/value pairs*?

This is a big one, since JSON, INI, XML, environment variables, command line parameters, and other config sources all need to work together. You don't have “arrays” in environment variables. So what does it look like?

The answer is that **numeric 0-based keys get generated for each element**. The flattened config looks like this:

```
components:0:database:enabled = "True"
components:1:files:enabled = "False"
```

Knowing how this works is huge because when you try to intermingle different configuration formats and override values, you have to generate *the same key structure*.



# Configuration Object Model

You have a *set* of these configuration providers, so you need something to handle the “merging” of all the providers and provide that single, unified view. This is where the `IConfigurationRoot` comes in. It keeps track of the final, built set of providers. This is what comes out of `ConfigurationBuilder.Build()`.

When you ask an `IConfigurationRoot` for a configuration item, it iterates through the set of providers (in reverse order - that's how the “override” works) until it finds the value, then returns the first value found. **If no value is found, it returns null.**

From the `IConfigurationRoot` you can ask directly for a key like `logging:level`*or* you can ask for an `IConfigurationSection`, which gives you a localized view of a sub-tree of the configuration. `root.GetSection("logging")` will get you the part of configuration that starts with `logging:`.

Everything under the `IConfigurationRoot` is an `IConfigurationSection`. This is where you'll spend most of your time. An `IConfigurationSection` has these methods and properties:

- `Key`: The local config key based on the current section. If you were looking at the `logging:level` section, the `Key` would be `level`.
- `Path`: The full path to the key from the root of config. This would be like `logging:level`.
- `Value`: If the configuration key has a value, this is it. Otherwise this value will be `null`.
- `this.[key]`: The configuration value of a child of this section.
- `GetSection(key)`: Gets a child `IConfigurationSection` of this section.
- `GetChildren()`: Gets the set of all child `IConfigurationSection` values from this section.

This is easier to see if we look at some code. Let's say we have the following configuration:

`appsettings.json`:

```json
{
  "debug": true,
  "logging": {
    "includeScopes": false,
    "logLevel": {
      "default": "Debug"
    }
  }
}
```

`overrides.json`:

```json
{
  "logging": {
    "logLevel": {
      "default": "Warning"
    }
  }
}
```

The flattened configuration will look like:

```YAML
debug = "True"
logging:includescopes = "False"
logging:loglevel:default = "Warning"
```

Let's build the configuration and wander around.

This will track the configuration sources we'll merge.
```F#
let builder = new ConfigurationBuilder()
```

Add two `JsonConfigurationProvider`s to the builder.
```F#
builder.SetBasePath(Directory.GetCurrentDirectory())
    .AddJsonFile("appsettings.json")
    .AddJsonFile("overrides.json")
|> ignore
```

设置基目录方法表示配置文件和程序文件所在相同目录下，注意配置文件的属性`复制到输出目录`选择：如果较新则复制。



Run through all the providers and build up the sources. This will actually read the JSON files and parse them.

```F#
let configRoot = builder.Build()
```

Ask for a value by absolute path. 
```F#
let includeScopes = configRoot.["logging:includescopes"]
```
This will be the string `"False"`

Grab the logging section so we can look at it.
```F#
let loggingSection = configRoot.GetSection("logging")

for child in loggingSection.GetChildren() do
    output.WriteLine(
        "{0} ({1}) = {2}",
        child.Path,
        child.Key,
        match child.Value with null -> "(null)"| v -> v)
```
Inspect the path, key, and value of each child. This will output:
```yaml
logging:includeScopes (includeScopes) = False
logging:logLevel (logLevel) = (null)
```
Notice the path is the absolute path, the key is relative to the parent section. Also notice it's only _immediate_ children you get.
注意输出的第二行，因为在展平的数据中不存在路径为`logging:logLevel`的值，即使存在路径为`logging:loglevel:default`的值，所以返回`null`。

You can get the `logging:loglevel` section by absolute path...
```F#
let logLevelSection = configRoot.GetSection("logging:loglevel")
```

...or you can get it as a child of the logging section we got earlier...
```F#
let logLevelSection = configRoot.GetSection("logging").GetSection("loglevel")
```
Now we can look at the children again:
```F#
for child in logLevelSection.GetChildren() do
    output.WriteLine(
        "{0} ({1}) = {2}",
        child.Path,
        child.Key,
        match child.Value with null -> "(null)"| v -> v)
```
This will output:
```yaml
logging:loglevel:default (default) = Warning
```
注意输出值是`Warning`，而不是`Debug`，这说明配置是后来者赢。



What happens if we ask for something that doesn't exist? WE GET BACK AN EMPTY SECTION, NOT AN EXCEPTION. You can't ask for a specific section by name to test if it was defined in configuration.
```F#
let doesNotExist = configRoot.GetSection("does:not:exist")
output.WriteLine(
    "{0} ({1}) = {2}",
    doesNotExist.Path,
    doesNotExist.Key,
    match doesNotExist.Value with null -> "(null)"| v -> v)
```
This will output:
```F#
does:not:exist (exist) = (null)
```
返回一个空的section，它会重复输入的路径和键，返回空值。

# Binding to Objects

Since everything comes out as strings. One of the first things you're likely going to do is parse the strings into strongly typed objects. You're going to have a lot of `Int32.TryParse()` and stuff all over the place.

参见文档： [将string解析为基元类型.md](将string解析为基元类型.md) 