
```F#
Seq.append: seq<'T> -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Wraps the two given enumerations as a single concatenated enumeration.


```F#
Seq.average: seq<^T> -> ^T
```
Returns the average of the elements in the sequence.


```F#
Seq.averageBy: ('T -> ^U) -> seq<'T> -> ^U
```
Returns the average of the results generated by applying the function to each element of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.cache: seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that corresponds to a cached version of the input sequence.


```F#
Seq.cast: IEnumerable -> seq<'T>
```
Wraps a loosely-typed `System.Collections`  sequence as a typed sequence.


```F#
Seq.choose: ('T -> 'U option) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'U>
```
Applies the given function to each element of the list. Return the list comprised of the results for each element where the function returns `Some` .


```F#
Seq.chunkBySize: int -> seq<'T> -> seq<seq<'T>>
```
Divides the input sequence into chunks of size at most `chunkSize`.


```F#
Seq.collect: ('T -> 'Collection) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'U>
```
Applies the given function to each element of the sequence and concatenates all the results.


```F#
Seq.compareWith: ('T -> 'T -> int) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T> -> int
```
Compares two sequences using the given comparison function, element by element.


```F#
Seq.concat: seq<'Collection> -> seq<'T> (requires 'Collection :> seq<'T>)
```
Combines the given enumeration-of-enumerations as a single concatenated enumeration.


```F#
Seq.contains: 'T -> seq<'T> -> bool
```
Evaluates to `true` if the given element is in the input sequence.


```F#
Seq.countBy: ('T -> 'Key) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'Key * int>
```
Applies a key-generating function to each element of a sequence and return a sequence yielding unique keys and their number of occurrences in the original sequence.


```F#
Seq.delay: (unit -> seq<'T>) -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that is built from the given delayed specification of a sequence.


```F#
Seq.distinct: seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that contains no duplicate entries according to generic hash and equality comparisons on the entries. If an element occurs multiple times in the sequence then the later occurrences are discarded.


```F#
Seq.distinctBy: ('T -> 'Key) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that contains no duplicate entries according to the generic hash and equality comparisons on the keys returned by the given key-generating function. If an element occurs multiple times in the sequence then the later occurrences are discarded.


```F#
Seq.empty: seq<'T>
```
Creates an empty sequence.


```F#
Seq.exactlyOne: seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the only element of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.exists: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> bool
```
Tests if any element of the sequence satisfies the given predicate.


```F#
Seq.exists2: ('T1 -> 'T2 -> bool) -> seq<'T1> -> seq<'T2> -> bool
```
Tests if any pair of corresponding elements of the input sequences satisfies the given predicate.


```F#
Seq.filter: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a new collection containing only the elements of the collection for which the given predicate returns `true` .


```F#
Seq.find: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the first element for which the given function returns `true` .


```F#
Seq.findIndex: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> int
```
Returns the index of the first element for which the given function returns `true` .


```F#
Seq.fold: ('State -> 'T -> 'State) -> 'State -> seq<'T> -> 'State
```
Applies a function to each element of the collection, threading an accumulator argument through the computation. If the input function is `f`  and the elements are `i0...iN,`  then this function computes `f (... (f s i0)...) iN` .


```F#
Seq.forall: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> bool
```
Tests if all elements of the sequence satisfy the given predicate.


```F#
Seq.forall2: ('T1 -> 'T2 -> bool) -> seq<'T1> -> seq<'T2> -> bool
```
Tests the all pairs of elements drawn from the two sequences satisfy the given predicate. If one sequence is shorter than the other then the remaining elements of the longer sequence are ignored.


```F#
Seq.groupBy: ('T -> 'Key) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'Key * seq<'T>>
```
Applies a key-generating function to each element of a sequence and yields a sequence of unique keys. Each unique key has also contains a sequence of all elements that match to this key.


```F#
Seq.head: seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the first element of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.init: int -> (int -> 'T) -> seq<'T>
```
Generates a new sequence which, when iterated, returns successive elements by calling the given function, up to the given count. The results of calling the function are not saved, that is, the function is reapplied as necessary to regenerate the elements. The function is passed the index of the item being generated.


```F#
Seq.initInfinite: (int -> 'T) -> seq<'T>
```
Generates a new sequence which, when iterated, will return successive elements by calling the given function. The results of calling the function are not saved, that is, the function will be reapplied as necessary to regenerate the elements. The function is passed the index of the item being generated.


```F#
Seq.isEmpty: seq<'T> -> bool
```
Tests whether a sequence has any elements.


```F#
Seq.iter: ('T -> unit) -> seq<'T> -> unit
```
Applies the given function to each element of the collection.


```F#
Seq.iter2: ('T1 -> 'T2 -> unit) -> seq<'T1> -> seq<'T2> -> unit
```
Applies the given function to two collections simultaneously. If one sequence is shorter than the other then the remaining elements of the longer sequence are ignored.


```F#
Seq.iteri: (int -> 'T -> unit) -> seq<'T> -> unit
```
Applies the given function to each element of the collection. The integer passed to the function indicates the index of element.


```F#
Seq.last: seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the last element of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.length: seq<'T> -> int
```
Returns the length of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.map: ('T -> 'U) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'U>
```
Creates a new collection whose elements are the results of applying the given function to each of the elements of the collection. The given function will be applied as elements are demanded using the `MoveNext`  method on enumerators retrieved from the object.


```F#
Seq.map2: ('T1 -> 'T2 -> 'U) -> seq<'T1> -> seq<'T2> -> seq<'U>
```
Creates a new collection whose elements are the results of applying the given function to the corresponding pairs of elements from the two sequences. If one input sequence is shorter than the other then the remaining elements of the longer sequence are ignored.


```F#
Seq.mapi: (int -> 'T -> 'U) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'U>
```
Creates a new collection whose elements are the results of applying the given function to each of the elements of the collection. The integer index passed to the function indicates the index (from 0) of element being transformed.


```F#
Seq.max: seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the greatest of all elements of the sequence, compared by using `Operators.max` .


```F#
Seq.maxBy: ('T -> 'U) -> seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the greatest of all elements of the sequence, compared by using `Operators.max`  on the function result.


```F#
Seq.min: seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the lowest of all elements of the sequence, compared by using `Operators.min` .


```F#
Seq.minBy: ('T -> 'U) -> seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Returns the lowest of all elements of the sequence, compared by using `Operators.min`  on the function result.


```F#
Seq.nth: int -> seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Computes the *nth* element in the collection.


```F#
Seq.ofArray: 'T array -> seq<'T>
```
Views the given array as a sequence.


```F#
Seq.ofList: 'T list -> seq<'T>
```
Views the given list as a sequence.


```F#
Seq.pairwise: seq<'T> -> seq<'T * 'T>
```
Returns a sequence of each element in the input sequence and its predecessor, with the exception of the first element which is only returned as the predecessor of the second element.


```F#
Seq.pick: ('T -> 'U option) -> seq<'T> -> 'U
```
Applies the given function to successive elements, returning the first value where the function returns a `Some`  value.


```F#
Seq.readonly: seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Creates a new sequence object that delegates to the given sequence object. This ensures the original sequence cannot be rediscovered and mutated by a type cast. For example, if given an array the returned sequence will return the elements of the array, but you cannot cast the returned sequence object to an array.


```F#
Seq.reduce: ('T -> 'T -> 'T) -> seq<'T> -> 'T
```
Applies a function to each element of the sequence, threading an accumulator argument through the computation. Begin by applying the function to the first two elements. Then feed this result into the function along with the third element and so on. Return the final result.


```F#
Seq.scan: ('State -> 'T -> 'State) -> 'State -> seq<'T> -> seq<'State>
```
Like `Seq.fold` , but computes on-demand and returns the sequence of intermediary and final results.


```F#
Seq.singleton: 'T -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that yields one item only.


```F#
Seq.skip: int -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that skips a specified number of elements of the underlying sequence and then yields the remaining elements of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.skipWhile: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that, when iterated, skips elements of the underlying sequence while the given predicate returns `true` , and then yields the remaining elements of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.sort: seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Yields a sequence ordered by keys.


```F#
Seq.sortBy: ('T -> 'Key) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Applies a key-generating function to each element of a sequence and yield a sequence ordered by keys. The keys are compared using generic comparison as implemented by `Operators.compare` .


```F#
Seq.sum: seq<^T> -> ^T
```
Returns the sum of the elements in the sequence.


```F#
Seq.sumBy: ('T -> ^U) -> seq<'T> -> ^U (requires ^U with static member (+) and ^U with static member Zero)
```
Returns the sum of the results generated by applying the function to each element of the sequence.


```F#
Seq.tail: seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a new sequence by taking the input sequence without its first element.


```F#
Seq.take: int -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns the first elements of the sequence up to a specified count.


```F#
Seq.takeWhile: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that, when iterated, yields elements of the underlying sequence while the given predicate returns `true` , and then returns no further elements.


```F#
Seq.toArray: seq<'T> -> 'T []
```
Creates an array from the given collection.


```F#
Seq.toList: seq<'T> -> 'T list
```
Creates a list from the given collection.


```F#
Seq.truncate: int -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that when enumerated returns no more than a specified number of elements.


```F#
Seq.tryFind: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> 'T option
```
Returns the first element for which the given function returns `true` , or `None`  if no such element exists.


```F#
Seq.tryFindIndex: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> int option
```
Returns the index of the first element in the sequence that satisfies the given predicate, or `None`  if no such element exists.


```F#
Seq.tryPick: ('T -> 'U option) -> seq<'T> -> 'U option
```
Applies the given function to successive elements, returning the first value where the function returns a `Some`  value.


```F#
Seq.unfold: ('State -> ('T * 'State) option) -> 'State -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a sequence that contains the elements generated by the given computation.


```F#
Seq.where: ('T -> bool) -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T>
```
Returns a new collection containing only the elements of the collection for which the given predicate returns `true` . A synonym for `Seq.filter` .


```F#
Seq.windowed: int -> seq<'T> -> seq<'T []>
```
Returns a sequence that yields sliding windows of containing elements drawn from the input sequence. Each window is returned as a fresh array.


```F#
Seq.zip: seq<'T1> -> seq<'T2> -> seq<'T1 * 'T2>
```
Combines the two sequences into a list of pairs. The two sequences need not have equal lengths: when one sequence is exhausted any remaining elements in the other sequence are ignored.


```F#
Seq.zip3: seq<'T1> -> seq<'T2> -> seq<'T3> -> seq<'T1 * 'T2 * 'T3>
```
Combines the three sequences into a list of triples. The sequences need not have equal lengths: when one sequence is exhausted any remaining elements in the other sequences are ignored.

